.TH RST2PDF 1 "September 01, 2008"
.SH NAME
rst2pdf \- Convert reStructuredText documents to PDF
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rst2pdf
.RI [options]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The usual way of creating PDF from reStructuredText (ReST) is by going
through LaTeX. The \fBrst2pdf\fP utility provides an alternative by
producing PDF directly using the ReportLab library.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\--output=\fP\fIFILE\fR, \fB\-o\fP \fIFILE\fR
Specify output location.
.TP
\fB\--stylesheet=\fP\fISTYLESHEET\fR, \fB\-s\fP \fISTYLESHEET\fR
Specify custom stylesheets (comma-seperated)
.TP
\fB\--compressed\fP, \fB\-c\fP
Create a compressed PDF.
.TP
.B \--print-stylesheet
Print the default stylesheet and exit.
.TP
\fB\--language=\fP\fILANG\fR, \fB\-l\fP \fILANG\fR
Language to be used for hyphenation.
.TP
\fB\--break-level=\fP\fILEVEL\fR, \fB\-b\fP \fILEVEL\fR
Maximum section level that starts in a new page. (Default: 1)
.TP
.B \--font-folder=\fIFOLDER\fR
Search this folder for fonts
.TP
\fB\--quiet\fP, \fB\-q\fP
Print less information.
.TP
\fB\--verbose\fP, \fB\-v\fP
Print debugging information.
.TP
.B \--very-verbose
Print even more debugging information.
.TP
\fB\-help\fP, \fB\-h\fP
Show help message.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
\fB$ rst2pdf rest.txt \-o out.pdf\fP
Produce an \fIout.pdf\fR file which is a PDF version of the ReST document
\fIrest.txt\fR.
.SH AUTHOR
\fBrst2pdf\fP was written by Roberto Alsina <ralsina@netmanagers.com.ar>.
.PP
This manual page was written by Chris Lamb <chris@chris-lamb.co.uk>,
for the Debian project (but may be used by others).
